 Until recently I had the impression that blogging had long since gone the way of the radio or VHS. I guessed blogs were culturally-relevant in the 2000s, during the world wide web’s ‘wild west’ days. I guessed they had long since been replaced by YouTube, podcasts, institutional news outlets, etc. Not so, it turns out.

There is a burgeoning and already extensive cloud of blogs kind of loosely floating around effective altruism and related ideas (could there be a way to [visualise this](http://redditstuff.github.io/sna/selfposts.html)?). I had no idea so much of the conversation is taking place on forums and by way of long-form blog posts. Studying philosophy, it is especially interesting to see familiar questions tackled by this unconventional and profoundly nerdy bunch of people with a speed and resourcefulness that far outstrips the stale pace of academic journals. There are costs and benefits here. Mistakes are more likely to be made and existing work missed on the one hand; but properly novel and crazy-sounding ideas are better generated without the specter of peer-review.

I thought it might be useful to organise the blogs I have discovered and enjoyed so far, roughly arranged by topic. I will revisit this and add to it when I have more to add. Some are not remotely EA related but seem to fit in with the crowd, at least to my own lights. I hope someone finds this useful, and discovers at least one blog or writer they didn’t know about. Please email me if you have more suggestions.

