# Saving the Web with Very Small Amounts of Money

In the past half-decade, something about our relationship with content on the web has quietly turned sour. It took more than one form: ads have inflated and spilled out over the pages they accompany, often bleeding with the author’s word. Who can reliably tell an honest review from subtly sponsored content? Journalism on the web – trusted as the ultimate open and democratic forum – has monopolised and polarised. What’s more, few people agree on exactly what is wrong – and among those who do, few have articulated a way out. A while ago I stumbled on the idea of ‘micropayments’. Micropayments offer a diagnosis: that a great deal of trouble has been caused by the way online content is (or isn’t) funded by its consumers. They also offer a solution: a new model for funding content.

By ‘content’ I mean articles, blog posts, videos, podcasts etc. Some of this lives on world-eating social media platforms (YouTube, Medium); others established institutions who have carved out a sustainable place on the web (The Guardian, New York Times); others on self-hosted corners of the web (personal blogs and podcasts). Roughly the same unfortunate dynamics operate in all three places.

In researching micropayments, I stumbled on [this article](https://www.notion.so/Web-Monetisation-b45b395e66a2464ab04d1f76ba90813f#14d9c7c4157b4abeb6aa468e1c624b75) titled ‘The Case for Micropayments’. The problem with free online content, it argued, is exactly that – consumers don’t expect to pay for it. Content providers and platforms turn to ads as a source of revenue:

> Ultimately, those who pay for something control it. Currently, most websites that don't sell things are funded by advertising. Thus, they will be controlled by advertisers and will become less and less useful to the users. A veritable arms race has already started with more and more annoying advertisements that intrude on the user's attention in an attempt to survive ever-declining click-through rates.

STATS HERE FROM ECONTALK ABOUT ADBLOCKS AND STUFF

FACEBOOKS TRICKERY TO GET AROUND IT

The first point is trite but accurate. Advertisers are skittish around provocative (if thoughtful) content that could tarnish their name, and reward attention-grabbing content because whether a person spots an ad has entirely nothing to do with whether the article it is attached to was engaging or enriching.

Ads are mildly inconvenient, ugly, and massively inefficient. Most of us blast the ‘fast forward’ button to skip the desperately enthusiastic read-out of whatever copy *this* mattress company have come up with. But because most of us skip the ad, and the rest of us infuriatingly bound to a steering wheel or handlebars just mentally check out; the podcast needs longer and more invasive ads to pay its bills. It’s an arms race, and the result looks ugly for everyone involved.

We install ad-blockers to avoid the eyesore of an article wrestling for attention among irrelevant banners, seeking out and killing auto-play videos, and to skip the drudgery of hovering your finger over the ‘skip ad’ button on a YouTube video. And this leads to an arms race dynamic from which nobody comes out better-off. Just over 30% of the top sites by traffic now implement [some means of detecting ad blockers](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/303302075_Ad-Blocking_and_Counter_Blocking_A_Slice_of_the_Arms_Race), and ad blockers become stealthier and more costly to circumvent in step. Ad blockers are no longer faintly illicit: Google has [introduced an ad blocker](https://www.theverge.com/2018/2/14/17011266/google-chrome-ad-blocker-features) for its own Chrome browser. The advertising revenue lost at the hands of ad blockers is estimated to be in the [tens of billions](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/where-will-the-ad-versus-ad-blocker-arms-race-end/) (total digital ad spending in the US reached $88 billion in 2017). That means ads must be targeted all the more aggressively and obtrusively at those users who decide not to use (or don’t know about) ad blockers to make up for lost ground. That’s the crucial feature of an arms race – every party involved would prefer that it never occurred.

Ads do not pay well. Your site needs serious footfall before that banner ad begins to pay any bills. A YouTube channel needs many thousands of views before the 5-second ads that play at the beginning can justify the time required to make high-quality videos – and so on. Independent content creators expecting a small but dedicated audience cannot rely on advertisements as a source of income, and nor can the smaller fry in the enormous and increasingly septic pond of online journalism. As such, smaller players die and big players consolidate. Readers (or consumers) lose out on the variety of perspectives lost in the melee. Worse still is the ‘silent evidence’ of every insightful, thoughtful article, video, or blog that never got written because its author could see no way to monetise it in a world of people who ‘expect free things’ online.

Yet, content is increasingly consumed online. A STAT HERE. The prevalent funding models on the web have effects which spill over into the real world. INDEPENDENT NEWSPAPER Tim Adams tels us in the Guardian that “[f]rom [2005 to the end of 2018, there was a net loss of 245 local news titles](https://www.pressgazette.co.uk/more-than-40-local-news-titles-closed-in-2018-with-loss-of-some-editorial-275-jobs-new-figures-show/). An estimated 58% of the country is now served by no regional newspaper.”

Yet, ads are necessary because content providers and producers must make money somehow. Subscriptions offer an alternative source of revenue, but subscriptions only work where the consumer is unusually loyal to a specific source (i.e. Sam Harris’ [podcast](https://samharris.org/podcast/)), or the provider aggregates many different sources. The article continues:

>Acknowledging that Web advertising is not a sufficient business model, several famous websites have announced that they will start charging subscription fees... Unfortunately, subscriptions are not a good idea on the Web.

> The main problem with subscription fees is that they provide  **a single choice**: between **paying nothing**  (thus getting nothing) and **paying a large fee** (thus getting everything). Faced with this decision, most users will chose to pay nothing and will go to other sites. It is rare that you will know in advance that you will use a site enough to justify a large fee and the time to register. Thus, most people will only subscribe to very few sites: the Web will be split up into disconnected "docu-islands" and users will be prevented from roaming over the full docuverse.

This seems like an accurate description of the state of play in 2020 – but the phrases ‘docu-islands’ and ‘docuverse’ did seem oddly archaic. I admit I yelped a little, on checking the article’s date, to see it had been written in 1998.

The authors of the early Web were forced to anticipate the most common errors that a user might encounter, and encode them in the standard server error codes we still use today. 404 still means “page not found”; 401 means. When, however, was the last time you encountered an error code 402? The creators of the web standards anticipated that error code 402 would be as widely  

This [blog post](https://www.notion.so/Web-Monetisation-b45b395e66a2464ab04d1f76ba90813f#d43745ad91314ff08f7547a39c55f4f3) from Mozilla reminds us how little has changed about the way content creators make money online in more than two decades:

> On today’s web, advertising has become the dominant business model. It’s something Sir Tim Berners Lee and his colleagues at CERN probably couldn’t have imagined when they published the first website nearly three decades ago.

Since the year before I was born, new and invidious dynamics have emerged which the dotcom pioneers likely could not have foreseen. Recommendation algorithms reward clicks and neglect quality – more clicks means more eyeballs, and more eyeballs means more ad revenue. Content creators must grapple with the constant pressure to produce ‘clickbait’ in an ‘attention economy’ where your article is skimmed in between dozens others on a Twitter timeline.

Is it a stretch to wonder if the funding model (or lack thereof) for online journalism played some causal role in the widely-reported upsurge of ‘post-truth’ political discourse? The mechanism isn’t hard to imagine: emotional appeals, divisive claims, inflammatory half-truths etc. are going to rake in more clicks, and so generate more ad revenue, than *nuance*. Doesn’t more clicks straightforwardly equate to more cash whatever your revenue model? That’s not obvious at all — when you pay with money as well as time, you’re incentivised to spend your time and your money on something you anticipate will be valuable ahead of time, or else freely tip only those things you found valuable after the fact. In other words: clickbait doesn’t work when it relies on anyone reading the whole thing and *choosing* to tip. Actually, this point can be extended: how often do you find yourself clicking on an attention-grabbing headline on your Twitter timeline or wherever else, only to furiously skim the thing for the juiciest morsels of controversy or intruige? Wouldn’t the expectation of needing to pay something like $0.20 for the privilege jolt you to reassess your reasons for engaging with content, and the kind of content you engage with in the first place? Might it be reasonable to expect, on the margin, curiosity to replace procrastination as the reason for clicks? Note that the costs of aimless procrastination are already there in the time you hand over to it — throwing real money into the mix, however little, just makes the cost salient. 

The Mozilla blog reminds us that “[c]ontent consumers face obstacles, too. There’s a myriad of paywalls and invasive trackers to navigate and dodge, yet no simple way to reward creators.” Often we pay instead with our data: handing over our email addresses, accepting cookies which follow us around the web.

In short, a great deal of worthwhile online content has failed to find a viable revenue model. I so often hear that this is because we have ‘come to expect’ such content to be free. Suggesting that this newspaper’s online publications might be worth *paying for* comes as an affront: we instantly search for a place to read about the same story without the hassle of plugging credit card details. And it is because of our own learned entitlement, we are told, that we cannot have good things – you get exactly what you are prepared to pay for.

I think this diagnosis is attractive but wrong. To begin with, my guess is that most people would agree that *other people* have become too entitled to free content (but not them). But if most people think some particular thing is true of other people and false of them, then most people are wrong. DRUNK PSYCHOLOGY ECPERIMENT. Equally, anybody who pays for a Netflix subscription, or buys music online, is signalling with their wallet that they are prepared to spend money for online content.   

The [story](https://www.theverge.com/2013/4/26/4265172/itunes-store-at-10-how-apple-built-a-digital-media-juggernaut) of iTunes drives this point home. In the early 2000s, digital music piracy was rife. The P2P file sharing software Napster had provided everyone with an internet connection a means of sharing and collecting music, virtually free of charge and legal liability. At its peak, more than 60% of college dorm network traffic consisted of mp3s [flying across the country](https://web.archive.org/web/20111019152028/http://www.isp-planet.com/politics/napster.html). A minimally tech-competent internet user had a way of downloading half the world’s music without paying a thing. Even with the full weight of major record labels, digital music stores – ‘MusicNet’, ‘Pressplay’ – proved to be flops. The online retailers which were [able to survive](http://www.thevlyhouse.com/2011/01/the-itunes-business-model-and-its-widespread-effects/) operated as subscription services. Then iTunes arrived, and charged $0.99 per song. It was well-designed, relatively frictionless, and fun to use. It worked. Even as [competitors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Music) arrived uncercutting iTunes’ prices, users stayed loyal to the uncluttered environment Apple had created. People *were* and *are* willing to spend money on digital content they could find elsewhere.

I think the best way to see why the ‘sheer selfishness’ explanation is wrong is to consider a thought experiment. Suppose the next time you read e.g. an article by a favourite journalist, you discover that clicking a button at the bottom of the page will instantly and automatically transfer $0.20 from your wallet to the journalist’s. How often would you choose to click the button in similar circumstances? My guess is that most people are sufficiently warm-blooded to click the button more than 20% of the time for e.g. a well-written 3000 word article. I have watched [video](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYO_jab_esuFRV4b17AJtAw) series, listened [to](https://verybadwizards.fireside.fm/) [podcasts](https://80000hours.org/podcast/), and read [free](https://slatestarcodex.com/) [online](http://mindingourway.com/guilt/) [blogs](https://www.brainpickings.org/) and [resources](https://plato.stanford.edu) which rival the very best lectures I went to at university. Come to think of it – I often learned more listening to a podcast on the walk to the lecture hall than I did for the next hour. If I were presented with some one-tap option to express my gratitude with a very small, ‘token’ amount of money, I would often do so unhesitatingly. If the small amount of money were *required* of me to access the content, I would be just as happy to cough up.

It may be beginning to sound like money is being left on the table here. If content providers offered an easy way to pay very small amounts of money for units of content, I’m suggesting that enough people would pay to rival advertising as a source of revenue. Why don’t they? Why was there never an iTunes for news, or blog posts, or streaming? 

One response is that this begs the question — in certain pockets of the internet, tipping small amounts of money already is straightforward enough to rival advertisements for revenue. The popular Chinese social media app [WeChat](https://www.cjr.org/tow_center/how-wechat-became-primary-news-source-china.php) recently installed a tip button for its users’ content. Users can pay to read the content that other users have produced, realising the micropayment model. For those authors whose potential audience use WeChat, far more money can be made through self-publishing your work in return for tips than through selling your work by the word to a journalistic outlet (who in turn make money primarily through advertisements). Here is the [experience](https://www.cjr.org/tow_center/how-wechat-became-primary-news-source-china.php) of one journalist:

> WeChat columnist He Caitou said earlier  in 2017 that on average he receives \$602 per article, and once received  ​\$4,815 for a short piece he wrote. He used to get paid ​\$75 per thousand-words by magazines.

Moreover, so-called “self-media” is less sensitive to the pressures that more established outlets feel from advertisers reluctant to place ads next to potentially controversial content; or even from outright censorship. It also reaches audiences which conventional (or ‘legacy’) media cannot. In the general case, some people are reluctant to positively seek out a news website but happy to engage with content if it can be integrated with their existing social media feed. In the case of WeChat, one article reports that, “[o]ver half of active users say the main reason they use WeChat is to get the news”.

These examples aside, a shallow explanation for the web’s micropayment-shaped hole is that payments online always involve the same flat costs of spending 30-or-so seconds plugging in your card details and possibly email, and then entrusting another payment platform or website with that information. That involves the psychic cost of sharing personal information, and the sheer inconvenience of digging out your payment details and plugging them in to a payment portal. A blog post or podcast episode worth $0.20 is just not worth that faff – even less so if we’re performing the same gymnastics half a dozen times a day.

A major limiting factor here is the technology that underlies online payments. Almost every online transaction conducted today will have been handled by one of two payment infrastructures: Visa or MasterCard. These networks often charge small flat fees (approx \$0.20) for transactions, or otherwise impose minimum fees. This isn’t obviously unnecessary – these companies need to cover the costs of [fraud prevention, errors, and chargebacks](https://newmoneyreview.com/index.php/2019/05/31/cracking-micropayments/). Credit card payments work (extremely) well for medium to large transfers of money (say \$2 and upwards) where security and relative immediacy are valued and anonymity and privacy are not. In a recent [Wired article](https://www.wired.com/story/shouldnt-we-all-have-seamless-micropayments-by-now/), [Zeynep Tufekci](https://www.wired.com/contributor/zeynep-tufekci) observes:

> Right now, we’re stuck where the automobile industry was when cars were still “horseless carriages,” wagon-wheeled monstrosities with high centers of gravity and buggy seats. We’re still letting an older technology—credit cards, designed for in-­person transactions, with high fees and financial surveillance baked in—determine the shape of a new technological paradigm. As a result, that paradigm has become twisted and monopolized by its biggest players. This is one of the modern internet’s greatest errors; it’s past time that we encounter “402 Payment Required” for real.

Credit cards found popular use in the [19*60*s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Credit_card#History), and were awkwardly ported to digital in the [late 90s](https://www.polymathconsulting.com/Cache/Downloads/A-Brief-History-of-Payments-from-Polymath-Consulting.pdf), shortly followed by the arrival of online-only payment systems like PayPal or Stripe. Ultimately, these newer systems are wrappers around the same credit card technology they are often framed as replacing or improving upon. PayPal, for instance, acts as a middleman between credit cards; paying interchange fees on heir behalf.

Unsurprisingly, alternative means of payment exist better suited to micropayments. Bitcoin is emphatically not one of them. Clearing a transaction on the Bitcoin network typically costs (in August 2020) [about $4](https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_average_transaction_fee) – more than 16 times as much as Visa and Mastercard charge. Other cryptocurrencies hold out much more promise.

The point is not that e.g. Visa, Mastercard, and other big payment processing networks are doing their job badly — that they got complacent, or have become complacent in the knowledge that incumbents have vanishing hopes of displacing them. [Coil](https://coil.com/) CEO Stefan Thomas notes in one [interview](https://www.w3.org/blog/2019/09/w3c-interview-coil-on-interledger-protocol-and-web-monetization/), “[t]hey are really good at their jobs, and it’s not like I can point at  those systems and say, “You’re using an outdated this or that.” These  are well-architected, and battle-tested systems”. Transferring money, it turns out, involves a whole lot more than decrementing my money counter and incrementing yours. You need protections and insurances in place against fraud; you need to distribute liabilities; you often need to convert between currencies, and so on. Nor would it be right to say that the reason big payment processors are so expensive and inconvenient for small web payments because they’re these huge, immovable middlemen through which every payment must pass — skimming from every transaction or otherwise working like an unnecessary bottleneck. On the one hand, middlemen can and do serve an indispensable purpose, and the value they offer very often outweighs the costs they impose (versus decentralised, direct transfer). On the other, decentralised networks which eliminate middlemen are often slower and far costlier — the average transaction fee on the Bitcoin network stands at a [shade over $4](https://ycharts.com/indicators/bitcoin_average_transaction_fee). It’s more accurate to say that different use cases are best served by different solutions. Credit cards aren’t suited to micropayments not because they’re generally outmoded, but because they’re the solution to a different bunch of problems.

I remember sitting in a half-empty lecture room to see a well-known figure in crypto pitch his new cryptocurrency. That was where I encountered the idea of micropayments for the first time – and the inadequacy of credit card infrastructure to handle them. Naturally, we were promised that *this* new altcoin is *it*: it’s scalable, it’s secure, and transaction costs are rock-bottom. Now we just need every payment system in the world needs to make the switch.

Alas, not even the shiniest new cryptocurrency can avoid the cold truths of [network effects](file:///C:/Users/finmo/AppData/Local/Temp/JLeibbrandt.pdf). Adopting the latest cryptocurrency XYZ as a means of transferring money is useful to the extent that other people accept XYZ – and their incentive to adopt XYZ varies with the number of other people they expect to use XYZ, and so on. If the adoption of a new platform plays out over the course of years, a content provider typically cannot afford to offer any kind of micropayment solution that relies on the network effects of competing payment technologies. Partial adoption in the case of micropayments for online content might prove to be particularly tricky if the old model relied on ads, because there’s little incentive to get round to adopting some new payment technology solely in order to avoid looking at some ads. If the partial adoption is from a subscription model, things looks marginally brighter: a consumer reluctant to shell out on certain subscriptions might find themselves wanting to read paywalled articles enough that adopting some micropayment technology is worth the effort. In sum: the tech already exists to facilitate fast, low-fee micropayments. The challenge here is multilateral adoption of that technology.

Even if the tech were adopted by everyone, there is the recalcitrant problem of the human attention span. The computer scientist Nick Szabo also notes the mental expenditure involved whenever we compare goods of any value. It just seems like an irredeemable  bug in the human source code that the effort we spend comparing \$1 goods is typically so much more than 1% of the effort we spend comparing \$100 goods. I am personally blessed with the special kind of neuroticism that compels me to anguish as I decide which of two near-identical anything to buy – a shopping trip involving dozens of such decisions is *draining*. Szabo’s point is that even once the technology allows for seamless ‘one-click’ micropayments, we are always going to be left with the burden of deciding whether this particular bit of content is *worth it*. Since the cost of that decision has a floor much higher than the fractions of dollars that micropayments involve, then few micropayments are worth it. In general, better to bundle goods together – we don’t get to choose our meals, we don’t get to tailor every ingredient. In Szabo’s own words:

> This entails a significant mental cost, which sets the most basic lower bounds on transaction costs. For example, comparing the personal value of a large, diverse set of low-priced goods might require a mental expenditure greater than the prices of those goods (where mental expenditure may be measurable as the opportunity costs of not engaging in mental labor for wages, or of not shopping for a fewer number of more comparable goods with lower mental accounting costs). In this case it makes sense to put the goods together into bundles with a higher price and an initutive synergy, until the mental accounting costs of shoppers are sufficiently low.

So a future for micropayments faces two basic problems: reaching a critical mass of users of whatever technology is used to implement them, and navigating the ‘mental accounting costs’ of payments of any size. In the rest of this post, I want to explore ways these problems have been solved. Do micropayments have a future, and what does it look like?

One way to dodge the network-effect problem is to already control one of the biggest networks in the world. Indeed, it looks as if micropayment plans are already cooking away at various social media giants, each planning to make use of existing users by implementing their own internal currency. The most prominent such example is Facebook; reportedly planning to launch its own native digital payments [this year](https://www.fstech.co.uk/fst/Facebook_To_Launch_Digital_Payments_Systems_In_2020.php) – colloquially tagged ‘Facebucks’. Since Facebook owns WhatsApp and Instagram, it is easy to imagine a full-blooded market growing up inside the walls of the Facebook garden. Your friend could write blog posts or publish family recipes, and charge a couple of Facebucks – which they could use in turn. Similarly, Apple’s new credit card grants cashbacks in ‘Apple Cash’: not real money, but redeemable in the app store or Apple Music, and so on.  Just as Facebook is able to capitalise on its ($\approx$ 2 billion) users, Apple Cash works because of Apple’s control over a vast ecosystem of content. A final example: in 2016 the streaming platform [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/) introduced their own internal currency of ‘Bits’. [Bits](https://www.twitch.tv/bits) are purchased in bulk with real money (1500 Bits would cost me £19.40) and used to buy ‘Cheers’. When your your favourite streamer is live, you can join the chat and Cheer a specified number of Bits. Depending on the size (cost) of your cheer, an animated emoji-type sticker will appear in the chat, and possibly on the stream itself. The streamer and the audience both know the cost of each such Cheer, and a big enough Cheer is often enough to garner sincere gratitude from the streamer for the rest of the audience to see. And top Cheerers earn special badges and coveted slots of Cheering leaderboards.

So one way to implement micropayments that don’t suck is to build a system inside your own walled garden. Even if that garden contains some two billion people, it still has walls. How might micropayments finally be realised on the world-wide-capital-W-Web? To find clues, consider internet pre-history.

The World Wide Web did not emerge fully formed from its complicated birth. Before the various military and academic infranets were able to form anything resembling an *inter*net, they needed to be able to speak to one another. For a period, however, they spoke past one another – various protocols worked with specific machines and those machines only. Those [protocols](https://www.computerhistory.org/revolution/networking/19/376) formed networks, but those networks criss-crossed and overlapped without ever joining; like the different systems of the human body (nervous, immune, circulatory…). Major corporations and political bodies had their favoured protocols. Eventually and perhaps inexorably, many disjoint networks became one internet ([precise chronology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Internet#Merging_the_networks_and_creating_the_Internet_(1973%E2%80%9395)) aside). Whatever the protocols ended up being, everyone had an interest in coordinating around one such protocol for each application. Compare: it doesn’t really matter whether everyone drives on the left or the right, we better pick one and stick to it. In practice, this led to a suite of protocols – [TCP/IP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_protocol_suite) – which have survived almost unmodified to the present day. If you want to retrieve text-based documents from a server (i.e. visit virtually any website on earth), your computer and the server share a language called [HTTP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_protocol_suite) to do so. Crucially, the requirements placed on users of the internet by these protocols were minimal and undemanding: they were thin wrappers with wide scope for variety, experimentation, and competition in the underlying hardware and software. It was just enough to guarantee that computers could talk to one another, and nothing more. As a result, few people know or care what the server that gives us our daily internet looks like or runs: it just works.

Are we with respect to payments as our World Wide Web predecessors were with respect to sending emails and ‘hypertext’ documents? This is the claim (hope?) of an initiative to implement a new protocol for ‘payments across payment systems’: the ‘[Interledger Protocol](https://interledger.org/)’. The analogy goes like this: before the introduction and implementation of agreed-upon communication protocols, different network systems, operating systems, and even hardware were not interoperable. If I wanted to speak to your computer, I had better check it belonged to the same network, and/or was made by the same manufacturer, and/or ran the same software. The absence of shared protocols meant that smaller networks were not able to form anything like an *inter*net. We are in that position nowadays with respect to payments: many payment service providers and gateways exist, with limited means of talking to one another. Credit cards constitute the most universal medium for online payments, but they’re clunky and the underlying ideas and infrastructure were never made with the internet in mind. Cryptocurrencies of various kinds boast a dizzying array of capabilities, but for the most part exchanges must be used to convert between currencies (including from fiat to crypto and vice-versa).  Not to mention, no cryptocurrency has nearly high enough adoption to constitute a viable de facto ‘currency of the web’. As such, the analogy continues, we need some kind of shared protocol for conducting online payments within and across payment providers and technologies.

Enter Interledger. Interledger bills itself as a shared and open source protocol for payments across different networks. Here’s the pitch from [interledger.org](https://interledger.org/):

> Interledger is an open protocol suite for sending payments across  different ledgers. Like the Internet, connectors route packets of money across independent networks. The open architecture and minimal protocol enable interoperability for any value transfer system. 

Interledger is (naturally) ledger-agnostic, and currency-agnostic. It also promises to support the transfer of very small quantities of money — in the order of $0.0001. My intention here is not to linger on precisely how Interledger works, and not just because I don’t really know. Note that Interledger can make confident claims about being able to process all manner pf payment sizes, speeds, and levels of security precisely because it doesn’t come with any established way of doing those things; but rather provides a way of *connecting* existing platforms and technologies. Like the early web protocols, the idea of Interledger is to abstract away as much as possible while holding onto this basic functionality. Being unopinionated is the point; because everything the protocol leaves unasserted is something left open to choice. Choice, of course, means competition. If you weren’t happy with your backend application, you could switch to any number of alternatives knowing that they will all be able to talk to the very same users the previous one did. TCP/IP worked in part because it was just about the most minimal abstraction going. By analogy, Interledger sets out a minimal “set of rules that define how nodes should send value”. It involves ideas it needs to involve in order to achieve that stated aim — some notion of packets, nodes, stages, etc. You’re required to specify an address to send the money, an amount, and some extra metadata. No less, but scarcely more. “It’s hard to imagine what you would take away to further simplify”, Stefan Thomas [notes](https://www.w3.org/blog/2019/09/w3c-interview-coil-on-interledger-protocol-and-web-monetization/).

Because the Interledger protocol is an abstraction that connects payment platforms, it doesn’t provide the technology for micropayments. By analogy, a protocol for sending documents by TCP/IP is worthless without servers and backend applications to do the sending and without actual humans to get their hands on a computer and start sending and receiving them. We have the cornerstone; it’s time to build around it. Enter [Coil](https://coil.com/), a micropayment service in the form of a browser extension that connects content creators with paying users. Remember how the Interledger protocol in principle supports transfers as tiny as one hundredth of a cent? Coil leverages this possibility to implement payment ‘streaming’; where a user continually pays the creator for the time they spend reading / watching / viewing / listening to their stuff.

Some more [detail](https://coil.com/learn-more). As a user, you pay Coil a \$5 per month subscription. Bundled into your subscription are subscriptions to a bunch of other sites or site perks which you would might not consider using otherwise: an [ad-free version](https://imgur.com/emerald) of [Imgur](https://imgur.com/), access to all content on a neat new video platform called [Cinammon](https://www.cinnamon.video/about) which pays its creators fairly. The real magic happens when a Coil subscriber visits the (independent, unaffiliated) site of a content creator who has signed up to receive Coil payments. For every second the user spends on that site (as long as they’re active), Coil begins streaming tiny amounts of money from user to creator — to the tune of \$0.36 an hour. Coil decides how to divvy up the $5 per month between the sites you visit each month in this way automatically; no intrusive buttons or to be pressed or decisions to be made here. As a creator, getting started involves signing up to the site and adding some code to your site. It’s unnervingly simple: a single meta tag:

```javascript
<meta name="monetization" content="$my-payment-address">
```

After that, you can detect who among your visitors is using Coil, and reward them with exclusive content or by removing ads, or whatever.

Remember Nick Szabo’s point about the ‘mental accounting cost’ of deciding when and how much to pay people, which he thought implied a lower bound on payments and thereby precluded micropayments? Payment streaming, in the model of Coil, solves that problem by bundling all the tiny decisions I have to make (“was this blog post worth £0.10?”) into a single decision to subscribe to Coil, after which payouts amounts get deferred to a simple time-on-site calculation. The final piece of the puzzle as far as technology goes is the [Web Monetization API](https://webmonetization.org/), a JavaScript browser API which plugs into Interledger and allows a website or browser extension to set up a payment stream. This makes Coil’s slow trickle of money possible.

Coil is by no means the only kid on the block. The ‘[Unlock Protocol](https://unlock-protocol.com/blog/its-time-to-unlock-the-web)’ promises a similar deal using its own blockchain where creators can grant access to paying members — “taking back subscription and access from the domain of middlemen — from a million tiny silos and a handful of gigantic ones — and transforming it into a fundamental business model for the web.” Then there’s [Scroll](https://scroll.com/), a subscription-based extension / app which vanishes ads for paying members. [Flattr](https://flattr.com/) gives users some extra control over who their money goes to, how much they pay, and how often.

With the exception of the Unlock Protocol, what all these solutions have in common is that they can be introduced incrementally; without having to wait for a critical mass of paid-up subscribers to Coil / Flattr / Scroll / whatever else. That’s because you can set your site to deliver ads to those who haven’t yet signed up, and remove them (or supplement with extra content) to those who have. No threshold for the number of users already signed up, so more network effects to worry about.

The last story in this hopeful trend towards better ways of funding the web is a fund established with a view to fostering these fairer, healthier ways of monetizing the web. It’s called [Grant For The Web](https://www.grantfortheweb.org/), it tallies to a sweet $100 million, and you can read about it on its very own lush [homepage](https://www.grantfortheweb.org/). It’s supported by some unimpeachably good eggs: [Coil](https://coil.com/), the [Mozilla Foundation](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/), and [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/).

Time to wrap up. If you remember anything, let it be this: content creation on the web is broken; it’s broken in large part because of how it currently makes (and can’t make) money; and things *did and do not have to be that way*. It is often [most comfortable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-world_hypothesis) to chalk up big seeming failures or inefficiencies or losses like this to some unchangeable feature of the world, or human nature, or plain arithmetic. Sometimes that explanation is right — sometimes seeming bugs are really indispensable features. Price tags might inconvenience consumers who wish that more things were free, but the world goes better when some things cost money. It is true that people have come to expect more and more content to be served up for free. Sometime we hear that this indicates a fundamental barrier to micropayments on the web: people just *won’t* pay for this stuff; we’ve spoiled ourselves; we got too much of a good thing. So we have ads, everywhere and unavoidably, and we have an arms race of ad blocking and escalation. But I submit there is no such barrier. We expect free stuff online by habit, but not by necessity or nature. What about the technology, or the business models? I wanted to demonstrate what I’d discovered in reading about this topic: that here too is good news. Interledger and the Web Monetization API are trying to do what the early internet protocols did for email, file sharing, and the World Wide Web: enabling competition between payment systems. Alternatives to credit card payments — notably in the form of cryptocurrencies — solve the  ‘minimum transaction cost’ problem and make transferring very small amounts of money feasible. [Coil](https://webmonetization.org/) and its competitors solve the ‘mental accounting cost’ problem by bundling payment decisions into a single subscription and streaming money to creators automatically. Adoption is not there yet — few creators will make a living by signing up to Coil, because few people have signed up to Coil. But Coil plays well with other sources of revenue — there’s no either-or. If Coil or something like it ever becomes truly ubiquitous, its adoption will have been incremental. So watch this space.

## Links and Further Reading

- [W3 post](https://www.w3.org/community/interledger/2015/10/09/a-web-of-ledgers/) on the Interledger Protocol
- Interledger [home page](https://interledger.org/)
- Nick Szabo — [The Mental Accounting Barrier to Micropayments](https://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature/LOTwinterschool2006/szabo.best.vwh.net/micropayments.html)
- CSS Tricks — [Site Monetization with Coil](https://css-tricks.com/site-monetization-with-coil-and-removing-ads-for-supporters/)
- The [Brave browser](https://brave.com/brave-rewards/)
- Jakob Nielsen (1998!) — [The Case For Micropayments](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/the-case-for-micropayments/)
- Esther Kezia Thorpe — [Why micropayments aren’t dead… yet](https://whatsnewinpublishing.com/why-micropayments-arent-dead-yet/)
- [Micropayments in publishing: where are we at?](https://whatsnewinpublishing.com/micropayments-in-publishing-where-are-we-at/)
- [Grant for the Web Opens Call for Proposals](https://foundation.mozilla.org/en/blog/grant-web-opens-call-proposals/)
- Paul Amery — [Cracking micropayments](https://newmoneyreview.com/index.php/2019/05/31/cracking-micropayments/)
- [Mojaloop](https://mojaloop.io/)
- Mozilla — [Innovating on Web Monetization: Coil and Firefox Reality](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2020/03/web-monetization-coil-and-firefox-reality/)
- Zeynep Tufekci — [Shouldn’t We All Have Seamless Micropayments By Now?](https://www.wired.com/story/shouldnt-we-all-have-seamless-micropayments-by-now/)
- JP Koning — [Micropayments Can Save Media, But First To Save Micropayments](https://breakermag.com/micropayments-can-save-media-but-first-to-save-micropayments/)
- W3C — [Interview with Stefan Thomas on Interledger and Coil](https://www.w3.org/blog/2019/09/w3c-interview-coil-on-interledger-protocol-and-web-monetization/)

